The next day, however, Harry barely grinned once. Things started to go
downhill from breakfast in the Great Hall. The four long House tables
were laden with tureens of porridge, plates of kippers, mountains of toast, and
dishes of eggs and bacon, beneath the enchanted ceiling (today, a dull, cloudy
gray). Harry and Ron sat down at the Gryffindor table next to Hermione, who
had her copy of Voyages with Vampires propped open against a milk jug.
There was a slight stiffness in the way she said “Morning,” which told Harry
that she was still disapproving of the way they had arrived. Neville
Longbottom, on the other hand, greeted them cheerfully. Neville was a roundfaced and accident-prone boy with the worst memory of anyone Harry had
ever met.
“Mail’s due any minute — I think Gran’s sending a few things I forgot.”
Harry had only just started his porridge when, sure enough, there was a
rushing sound overhead and a hundred or so owls streamed in, circling the
hall and dropping letters and packages into the chattering crowd. A big,
lumpy package bounced off Neville’s head and, a second later, something
large and gray fell into Hermione’s jug, spraying them all with milk and
feathers.
“Errol!” said Ron, pulling the bedraggled owl out by the feet. Errol
slumped, unconscious, onto the table, his legs in the air and a damp red
envelope in his beak.
“Oh, no —” Ron gasped.
“It’s all right, he’s still alive,” said Hermione, prodding Errol gently with
the tip of her finger.
“It’s not that — it’s that.”
Ron was pointing at the red envelope. It looked quite ordinary to Harry, but
Ron and Neville were both looking at it as though they expected it to explode.
“What’s the matter?” said Harry.
“She’s — she’s sent me a Howler,” said Ron faintly.
“You’d better open it, Ron,” said Neville in a timid whisper. “It’ll be worse
if you don’t. My gran sent me one once, and I ignored it and” — he gulped —
“it was horrible.”
Harry looked from their petrified faces to the red envelope.
“What’s a Howler?” he said.
But Ron’s whole attention was fixed on the letter, which had begun to
smoke at the corners.
“Open it,” Neville urged. “It’ll all be over in a few minutes —”
Ron stretched out a shaking hand, eased the envelope from Errol’s beak,
and slit it open. Neville stuffed his fingers in his ears. A split second later,
Harry knew why. He thought for a moment it had exploded; a roar of sound
filled the huge hall, shaking dust from the ceiling.
“— STEALING THE CAR, I WOULDN’T HAVE BEEN SURPRISED IF
THEY’D EXPELLED YOU, YOU WAIT TILL I GET HOLD OF YOU, I
DON’T SUPPOSE YOU STOPPED TO THINK WHAT YOUR FATHER AND
I WENT THROUGH WHEN WE SAW IT WAS GONE —”
Mrs. Weasley’s yells, a hundred times louder than usual, made the plates
and spoons rattle on the table, and echoed deafeningly off the stone walls.
People throughout the hall were swiveling around to see who had received the
Howler, and Ron sank so low in his chair that only his crimson forehead
could be seen.
“— LETTER FROM DUMBLEDORE LAST NIGHT, I THOUGHT YOUR
FATHER WOULD DIE OF SHAME, WE DIDN’T BRING YOU UP TO
BEHAVE LIKE THIS, YOU AND HARRY COULD BOTH HAVE DIED —”
Harry had been wondering when his name was going to crop up. He tried
very hard to look as though he couldn’t hear the voice that was making his
eardrums throb.
“— ABSOLUTELY DISGUSTED — YOUR FATHER’S FACING AN
INQUIRY AT WORK, IT’S ENTIRELY YOUR FAULT AND IF YOU PUT
ANOTHER TOE OUT OF LINE WE’LL BRING YOU STRAIGHT BACK
HOME.”
A ringing silence fell. The red envelope, which had dropped from Ron’s
hand, burst into flames and curled into ashes. Harry and Ron sat stunned, as
though a tidal wave had just passed over them. A few people laughed and,
gradually, a babble of talk broke out again.
Hermione closed Voyages with Vampires and looked down at the top of
Ron’s head.
“Well, I don’t know what you expected, Ron, but you —”
“Don’t tell me I deserved it,” snapped Ron.
Harry pushed his porridge away. His insides were burning with guilt. Mr.
Weasley was facing an inquiry at work. After all Mr. and Mrs. Weasley had
done for him over the summer . . .
But he had no time to dwell on this; Professor McGonagall was moving
along the Gryffindor table, handing out course schedules. Harry took his and
saw that they had double Herbology with the Hufflepuffs first.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the castle together, crossed the vegetable
patch, and made for the greenhouses, where the magical plants were kept. At
least the Howler had done one good thing: Hermione seemed to think they
had now been punished enough and was being perfectly friendly again.
As they neared the greenhouses they saw the rest of the class standing
outside, waiting for Professor Sprout. Harry, Ron, and Hermione had only just
joined them when she came striding into view across the lawn, accompanied
by Gilderoy Lockhart. Professor Sprout’s arms were full of bandages, and
with another twinge of guilt, Harry spotted the Whomping Willow in the
distance, several of its branches now in slings.
Professor Sprout was a squat little witch who wore a patched hat over her
flyaway hair; there was usually a large amount of earth on her clothes and her
fingernails would have made Aunt Petunia faint. Gilderoy Lockhart, however,
was immaculate in sweeping robes of turquoise, his golden hair shining under
a perfectly positioned turquoise hat with gold trimming.
“Oh, hello there!” he called, beaming around at the assembled students.
“Just been showing Professor Sprout the right way to doctor a Whomping
Willow! But I don’t want you running away with the idea that I’m better at
Herbology than she is! I just happen to have met several of these exotic plants
on my travels . . .”
“Greenhouse three today, chaps!” said Professor Sprout, who was looking
distinctly disgruntled, not at all her usual cheerful self.
There was a murmur of interest. They had only ever worked in greenhouse
one before — greenhouse three housed far more interesting and dangerous
plants. Professor Sprout took a large key from her belt and unlocked the door.
Harry caught a whiff of damp earth and fertilizer mingling with the heavy
perfume of some giant, umbrella-sized flowers dangling from the ceiling. He
was about to follow Ron and Hermione inside when Lockhart’s hand shot out.
“Harry! I’ve been wanting a word — you don’t mind if he’s a couple of
minutes late, do you, Professor Sprout?”
Judging by Professor Sprout’s scowl, she did mind, but Lockhart said,
“That’s the ticket,” and closed the greenhouse door in her face.
“Harry,” said Lockhart, his large white teeth gleaming in the sunlight as he
shook his head. “Harry, Harry, Harry.”
Completely nonplussed, Harry said nothing.
“When I heard — well, of course, it was all my fault. Could have kicked
myself.”
Harry had no idea what he was talking about. He was about to say so when
Lockhart went on, “Don’t know when I’ve been more shocked. Flying a car to
Hogwarts! Well, of course, I knew at once why you’d done it. Stood out a
mile. Harry, Harry, Harry.”
It was remarkable how he could show every one of those brilliant teeth
even when he wasn’t talking.
“Gave you a taste for publicity, didn’t I?” said Lockhart. “Gave you the
bug. You got onto the front page of the paper with me and you couldn’t wait
to do it again.”
“Oh, no, Professor, see —”
“Harry, Harry, Harry,” said Lockhart, reaching out and grasping his
shoulder. “I understand. Natural to want a bit more once you’ve had that first
taste — and I blame myself for giving you that, because it was bound to go to
your head — but see here, young man, you can’t start flying cars to try and
get yourself noticed. Just calm down, all right? Plenty of time for all that
when you’re older. Yes, yes, I know what you’re thinking! ‘It’s all right for
him, he’s an internationally famous wizard already!’ But when I was twelve, I
was just as much of a nobody as you are now. In fact, I’d say I was even more
of a nobody! I mean, a few people have heard of you, haven’t they? All that
business with He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!” He glanced at the lightning
scar on Harry’s forehead. “I know, I know — it’s not quite as good as winning
Witch Weekly’s Most-Charming-Smile Award five times in a row, as I have —
but it’s a start, Harry, it’s a start.”
He gave Harry a hearty wink and strode off. Harry stood stunned for a few
seconds, then, remembering he was supposed to be in the greenhouse, he
opened the door and slid inside.
Professor Sprout was standing behind a trestle bench in the center of the
greenhouse. About twenty pairs of different-colored earmuffs were lying on
the bench. When Harry had taken his place between Ron and Hermione, she
said, “We’ll be repotting Mandrakes today. Now, who can tell me the
properties of the Mandrake?”
To nobody’s surprise, Hermione’s hand was first into the air.
“Mandrake, or Mandragora, is a powerful restorative,” said Hermione,
sounding as usual as though she had swallowed the textbook. “It is used to
return people who have been transfigured or cursed to their original state.”
“Excellent. Ten points to Gryffindor,” said Professor Sprout. “The
Mandrake forms an essential part of most antidotes. It is also, however,
dangerous. 
